= Content nodes

== SW Content node

, which involves both communication across HSTP protocols (query/response) as well as joining nodes together to create ad-hoc super nodes (i.e., spatial web federation).

Structure of the Spatial Web Node, including the primary hstp.d and hsml.d daemons, the domain graph, a credential graph, and a schema graph.

Bridging HSTP and UDG scopes (handled through hstp.d and hsml.d respectively)

Managing internal local hstp.d clocks (repeating internal events) to manage query and updates against live resources.

Place, Person, Thing and SW Node registry for commonly referenced entities (the Spatial Web registry)

=== Spatial Web Node Design

This section focuses primarily on the broad scope of the spatial web node system
and how it interacts with the UDG.

A spatial web node is the abstraction of a long running application (the node
daemon) that connects to other spatial web nodes to provide information about
specific HSML domains or the structures that support them, communicating over
the HSTP protocol. Like most modern web applications, a spatial web node can
support both a server that maintains state of a domain graph model and provides
stateful content (as HSML) and a client that can render that HSML in a form that
a service or user can understand. The state of the domains is maintained within
a specially design ___domain graph___ (currently built on top of a semantic RDF
knowledge graph, though this likely will be hidden as an abstraction).

The node is controlled by a specific daemon (or persistant process) called the
Spatial Web Node Manager (indicated by the swnode.d process). The precise
implementation of the node will vary, but at least to start with, it will
usually run on a specific port (or more likely sets of ports) on a given
machine.

The role of the node daemon is to orchestrate the node's various activities, as shown in the following listing:

[[fig-udg-node-design]]
.UDG Computing Node Design
image::UDG_Node_Design.png[UDG Computing Node Design]

// [source,mermaid]
// ----
// ---
// config:
//     layout: elk
// ---
// graph LR
// nm["Node Manager (swnode.d)"]
// hstp["HSTP Manager (hstp.d)"]
// gm["Graph Manager (graph.d)"]
// dm["Domain Manager (domain.d)"]
// agent["Agent Manager (agent.d)"]
// hsml["HSML Manager (hsml.d)"]
// cred["Credential Manager (cred.d)"]
// client["Client Manager (swclient.d)"]
// nm <--> hstp & dm & cred & client
// hstp <--> dm & gm
// dm <--> gm & agent & hsml
//----


=== HSTP Manager

This handles message routing from both external agents (users) and from other
spatial web nodes, taking in HSTP based messages carrying HSML and payloads and
transmitting HSTP responses back to users or (through the onboard client) to
other nodes. These messages are generally sent to the domain manager, rather
than executed directly. (Note, this is different from the current
implementation, though the primary change will likely just be which system
handles these executions).

=== Domain Manager

The domain manager has a number of roles:

* generates a domain thread from a domain template and populates it with
appropriate agents, things and places.

* works with the system clock (an internal tick) to invoke the activities on
that thread of the relevant agents, which in turn is used for autonomous and
semi-autonomous agents working in a state graph system,

* translates HSTP messages into UDG notifications for autonomous agents.

* manages inter- and intra-agent communication within domains

* determines whether the domain has reached critical states (such as an end
state in a simulation)

* communications with the node domain graph to read and update state within the
graph.

* passes relevant map responses (entity streams) back to the hstp manager.

=== Graph Manager

The graph manager is a low level service that interacts directly with the graphs
within the node in order to provide an abstraction layer for graph management.
It performs a number of functions.

* Translates HSQL query requests and updates into the implementation specific
requests of the current graph technology. This exists primarily to ensure that
there are no explicit dependencies upon the underlying graph store.

* Provides a mechanism to add multiple external graphs to the current graph so
that they can be queried as if they were a single graph. This is what is known
as a federated graph (and it is currently just specific to RDF, but that may
change). Such a graph doesn't necessarily scale well towards a large number of
nodes (>100), but it can be very useful when building a domain that scales
across multiple machines. By separating the graph manager from the domain
manager, it becomes possible for the domain manager on one machine to work with
multiple nodes simultaneously without having to go across hstp.

* Graph replication. Replicating a graph (while something of an edge case) is
easy enough to accomplish at the graph layer; RDF has global identifiers, and as
such a graph can be replicated by simple serialisation into any RDF format.
Record deduplication is similarly straightforward, as RDF is specifically built
to work on an index format such that multiple resources with the same URI
automatically to the relevant ntuple index. This is one of the many reasons that
RDF is recommended from the graph layer.

=== HSML Manager

HSML is used to describe the state of domains within the graph, but it is also
used to indicate activities, frames of activity over time, conditional
expressions and contexts, both within the domains and within HSTP messages
containing relevant changes and credentials. The HSML process is used in
conjunction with the domain managers to provide indications of how entities
change. It is not necessarily a daemon, but instead exists primarily as an
interpreter that can then pass information off toe domain manager to implement,
generally through the graph manager interface.

=== Agent Manager

Things within domains are agents. An agent can be thought of as something that
is capable of change within a domain, with the most prominant such change being
a change of motion within some phase space, or a change of state. The agent
manager performs a number of roles.

* The domain manager typically manages the the "tick" of the system clock and
its dissemination to the various agents. The agent manage is what interprets the
messages of the domain to any given agent.

* Agent may be passive (they can only be activated by activities from other
agents), active (they are capable of action independent of other agents), or
inactive (they do not receive messages except for messages to activate in either
passive or active mode). The inactive state exists primarily to reduce the
number of cycles that a given agent requires for processing if not necessary.

* The agent manager handles moving an agent from place to place, either through
linking or through replication across domains over spatial web node boundaries.
If linking between such boundaries (typical, for instance, accross affiliated
nodes that have similar domain constraints), then the agent manager will freeze
an agent (make it inactive and hidden) on one machine, and will then replicate
the agent on a different spatial web node, or updating the existing history of
the agent to an existing proxy on a different node.

* Agents maintain an internal state history, the mechanisms for which are TBD,
through the interface of the agent manager (there may be a history manager that
specifically handles that operation, again TBD)

=== Credential Manager

The credential manager handles the creation of SWIDs on agents, places, and
domains, as well as caching credentials from external hstp invocations, in
effect acting as the wallet for the various domains within the node. This will
typically be a proxy for various types of accreditation and verification
mechanisms. Full implementation TBD.

=== Client Manager

This is a low level __command line interface__ for text-based communication with
a spatial web node. Every node supports some kind of CLI interface and may
support others (multimodal chat, 2 or 2 1/2 D maps, 3D environments, animations,
and so forth).


=== Dynamic handling of links 

When a link is received by the domain manager, it uses the context determined by
these parameters to determine other necessary metadata. These are then passed to
the link's activation handler (or the defaults relevant by type) to perform the
associated link action.

Links can be set up by the domain designer via the periodicity property as one
of singleton (the link is only activated once) or periodic (the link is invoked
across a given channel periodically until either the link is terminated or the
channel's time-to-live (TTL) is exceeded). Once the link completes, it will
either be reset (the default) or it will be expired (for links that expire upon
use).

This operation is handled by the domain manager. Note that in fully autonomous
operations, open links simply cause the agent to reset to the new place (and
domain, if this changes, without UX involvement. However, key activation still
requires the relevant credentials.

== UDG Node and node network

=== Network of UDG nodes

multiple tiers to the UDG Node network

Distributed replicate synchronization
BIG TABLE

** **Extended Domain Graphs** - this extends the scope of a given domain by incorporating external graphs into the systems at the query level. This makes using common codebases and templates feasible
** **Spatial Web Nodes** - Spatial web nodes are the physical backbone of the spatial web, and are primarily the servers that host the various managers of resources.
** **Affiliation Networks** - Each node (and many domains within the nodes) belong to one or more affiliation networks. Some of these may be huge, with potentially millions of nodes, others may be the equivalent of local intranets. Moreover, affiliations can themselves be affiliated, creating a superstructure that can scale up to:
** **The Spatial Web** - This is the aggregate of all affiliation networks.


Not all (perhaps not even most) domains will be in publicly available affiliates. Many of these domains will be private networks intended for access only by  those with need to know (or to modify), especially those with IoT interconnections.

The affiliate design is also a specific requirement for a decentralized architecture. A true peer-to-peer system likely will not scale to the same level (there are few Internet scale peer-to-peer systems after more than 35 years). This would especially be the case given the requirements to ensure private control over domains, along with the sensitivity of much of the internal data.


=== Moving a DOMAIN between UDG Nodes

Links are one of the few actions that can cross spacial web node boundaries.  Activating the link initiates a sequence of steps:

* Negotiate a challenge that checks to make sure that the agent can be moved.
* Identify if the agent has a corresponding swid on the new system. If not, create one.
* Copy the metadata for that agent in the graph of the new server.
* Attach the agent to the indicated place within the new domain.
* Notify the current server that the agent has been successfully replaced.
* Deactivate the agent on the current node (not remove, just deactivate) if the transfer was successful, otherwise send a note to the actor of the current agent that the link failed.

This is more complex than moving within a given node because the latter simply requires changing pointers.

=== Augmented Node Graphs

In some cases, it is possible to attach the graph of one node to another in
order to create a larger federated graph. This bypasses the normal HSTP protocol
system. This is used primarily for those cases where a single domain may in fact
be distributed across multiple servers, or where common resources such as
schemas are shared across multiple chained nodes. The chained nodes are called
__Augmenting Node Graphs__ and the chaining graph is called the __Augmented Node
Graph__. More information will be forthcoming regarding such graphs.

=== Directory Domain and Home Places

A spatial web node can identify a particular domain that serves as it's
directory domain. If no domain is specified by an hstp request, this will be the
default domain. This domain is designed to provide a directory or catalog of the
domains that are accessible to a given external agent based upon their
credential profile, and also provides mechanisms to "sign in" if this is
required to change the domains that they see.

Similarly, within every domain, there is the option of specifying a home place.
This is where agents are positioned when they first "enter" a given domain, if
no domain is otherwise specified. In simple scenarios (such as the smart room
scenario), there may be only one place in the domain, but in more complex
scenarios (especially those representing tours or rpgs), this home place
typically also serves the role of establishing context and backstory for the
agent, providing instructions for interacting with the domain, and identifying
pertinent "destinations".


==== Home Domains

There is a chicken and egg situation with regard to whether a given Spatial Web
Node can be considered an agent or a domain. To get around this, there is a
specific exception to the idea that all agents exist on places within domains.
There is assumed to be on a given spatial web node a designated Home Domain that
is explicitly stated to be associated with the node itself. It's "agency" in
this particular case is the action of the node daemons, with specific
capabilities. When a spatial web node is first set up, this home domain/agent
holds the configuration metadata for the node itself, as well as any credentials
that are specific to the node.

Put another way, ___from the standpoint of the UDG, the Spatial Web Node is a
domain, with an implicit super agent___. The mechanics of this are still to be
determined.

=== UDG Node components

A typical Spatial Web UDG Node consists of a number of key components.

The hstp.d daemon::
This is the analog to the http.d daemon that powers HTTP web servers. It handles
the receipt of messages across channnels to the SW Node, and it also routes
messages in outbound channels to their destination. Its primary purpose is to
communicate with the broader Spatial Web, though it also has certain operations
that it can perform on the underlying domain graph of the SW Node.

The hsml.d process::
This interprets incoming HSML messages and translates these into specific UDG
query and update commands. It is usually invoked by the hstp.d daemon to provide
interpretation of HSML, but it can also be used as necessary to create HSML
DOMs. In this phase, the assumption is that the incoming HSML will be in some
form of RDF - JSON-LD, Turtle, RDF-XML etc, but this is not necessarily a formal
requirement so long as there is some consistent mapping to the internal
representation.

The udg.d domain daemon::
This is an internal high frequency loop that is used in order to animate domains
to manage state. It is only very peripherally connected to HSTP (primarily when
dealing with SW Node to Node communication), but in general it this process that
handles the internal state changes to the domain graph.

The domain graph::
The domain graph is a graph that maintains state within the various domains
contained within the SW Node. Collectively, the set of all domain graphs of all
Spatial Web Nodes is known as the __Universal Domain Graph__ (or __UDG__).
However, it is worth noting that this is not a single comprehensive graph but
rather a collection of graphs.

augmented graph module::
This is a module that works in conjunction with the hsml.d process to join
multiple domain graphs together into a single comprehensive graph. Note that
this is used primarily to extend the domain graph for handling complex
environments, and generally sits outside of the normal hstp.d processes.

certificate caches::
There are multiple certificate caches that are maintained by each Spatial Web
Node in order to reduce access time, especially for permissions. The caching
mechanism also serves to help resolve SWIDs on the local system.

SWID Generator::
Each Spatial Web node contains a mechanism to generate SWIDs that follow SWID
certificate standards, in effect acting like a wallet. This may be implemented
as a subgraph in the system or as a separate blockchain.

Transformation Pipeline::
Ordinarily, the output from a query will be some form of graph. However, for a
number of reasons, there will be times when the output needs to be transformed
into some other format (most especially HSML) or filtered in some other way
(such as through an LLM). The transformation pipeline handles this process.

Collector::
Certain operations involve aggregating the results of queries across multiple
spatial web nodes. The Collector module (part of hstp.d) is a queue that
collects incoming messages and aggregates them for transmission back to the
client. The exact details of the collector module are still TBD.

Extension Modules::
In all of these components, the fundamental design will be modular, such that
each component can be extended by code depending upon implementation. For
instance, the HSML encoder, the UDG.d and the HSTP.d all have access points for
agentic systems and e-commerce capabilities, components can be used for
converting external datasets into data analytics forms, transformations can be
written that generate images, maps, and related formats and so forth. These
module extensions would be integrated in by individual SW Node Administrators.

== Registry Node

=== Node for the Domain Registries

__Definition__. A __registry__ in the Spatial Web is a specific spatial web node that provides a number of services related to discovery, definition, search, DiD and alias resolution of resources. Most Spatial Web nodes provide registry services specifically for the resource within their respective graphs, though there are dedicated (public) nodes that exclusively handle these resources for public networks.

EDITOR: This document focuses solely on entity and domain registries. For more information about node registers, cf. link:node-registries.md[Node Registries].

=== Networks Neighborhoods of nodes

A SW Node communicates with other SW Nodes via HSTP. SW Nodes connect in one of
two ways:

. Via __neighborhood connections__ made when the node connects via a nodelink (a
specialized form of link that identifies a node) to another node. The successful
negotiation caches the nodelink in the node's __nodecache__. This is a
peer-to-peer connection.

. Via registration with a __public node registry__. In this case, the node
becomes visible to all other members of the registry. The registration process
returns a set of credentials that translate selected links from a search into
neighborhood links.

In both cases, when a node queries another node about its neighborhood, it can
cache the connections of the queried node. Case 2 in fact is essentially
Case 1 at a larger scale. Each node contains a certain amount of intrinsic
metadata about the type of domains on the system, which can in turn be used to
provide a facet query to find links from another node that have similar or
overlapping facets.

For instance, if a given node mostly contained shipping information, the facets
that it has can provide scores against another SW Node's registry metadata that
was tied into shipping to retrieve those particular SW Nodes that are most like
the requested nodes.

In addition to that, when a Spatial Web Node first registers with a registry, it
can retrieve schema definitions, common resources, code libraries and a
"starter" set of node links that can then be used to add to the neighborhood of
the registering node.

Nodelinks typically have a time-to-live attribute (TTL) that indicates how long
a link can remain active before it needs to be refreshed. If a nodelink cannot
be resolved, then a secondary TTL is activated that indicates how long an
interval should be taken before the link is considered dead, and consequently
should be purged.


=== Repositories, Registries

A __repository__ is a spatial web node that contains commonly utilized taxonomies, schemas, agents, activities, and other resources. A __registry__, on the other hand, is a way of registering the locations of specific spatial web nodes and their associated resources. The spatial web nodes, then would make use of the same DNS registry that HTTP and HTTPS uses, with the additional caveat that access would be moderated by credentials.

The Spatial Web Foundation should be responsible for maintaining core repositories, especially places, taxonomic concepts, activity components and schemas. This is a common requirement, and while others can and will create
their own definitions, they can use spatial web concepts to provide core
provenance and structure.

The Spatial Web Foundation should also be responsible for a Spatial Web
Registration Authority (SWRA). The purpose of such a registry is to provide a
clearinghouse for identifying and classifying public domains, using the Spatial
Web UDG Taxonomy (and the corresponding hsml:hasTopic and related predicates) to
help to identify relevant content.

When a Spatial Web Node is registered with SWRA several things happen:


* The ipv6 address of the node server is registered, along with a web domain
name and (if different from the default) a port. The SWRA registry can also
register the relevant IP addresses.

* A SW domain on a SW node can be assigned a public SWRA credential that
indicates that the domain in question is a part of the SWRA network (similar
networks can be established with different sets of credentials).

* Periodically, the spatial web node can send an update of all domains on that
node that have the relevant credentials. This include any metadata (topics) that
are associated with the domain. Note that these domains provide access points to
other domains that may not necessarily be transmitted to the registry. As such
they should be seen as starting points for various domain activities. Not all
domains on a node need (or should) be so registered.

* Registries that issue their own credentials create __affiliation networks__.
For instance, a given company that produces lines of IoT devices with associated
HSML interfaces may end up providing an affiliation network of all nodes that
make use of these devices, and as such share common domain and agent interfaces,
taxonomies, structures and so forth. Similarly, a multi-system role playing game
may set up an affiliation network where each node hosts one or more domains in
that particular universe, with the ability for agents to move from one node to
another through the use of supported credentials in that affiliation network.

* A SW Node (and associated domains) can be part of multiple affiliation
networks. For instance, a federal government may provide a core affiliation
network for its member states, each both sharing resources and providing
information, as well as identifying what other nodes are part of that
affiliation.

* Both a repository and a registry are spatial web nodes. What differentiates
them is primarily whether they have the additional functions of registration and
whether they permit sharing within one or more affiliate networks. This are
additional modules that can be added on to the base functionality of the spatial
web node.

* Moreover, a spatial web node can be both a repository and a registry.

=== Affiliation Networks

An __affiliation network__ is a network of spatial web nodes which shares common
resources, taxonomic classifications and typically a common registry. The
registry serves as the hub of the network, identifying membership in the
affiliation network as well as providing a mechanism for discovery within that
network.

One of the roles of a registry is to issue and affiliation credential. This
credential serves as a way of verifying that nodes within the network are in
fact part of that network, and provide permissions that spatial web clients need
to have in order to access certain features.

For instance, a group of universities in a given region may establish an
affiliated network. This means that each university effectively agrees to abide
by specific taxonomies as a way of organizing information, provides common set
of activities for performing such tasks as transferring students between
universities, enrolling in classes, and so forth, and will often allow students
and faculty from one university to access resources or get consistent grading at
other universities within the affiliation.

This is accomplished through a "university league" credential which is issued
when the node is added to the network. When a student registers to a given node,
their user agent (the software client they interact with) within the system
receives a corresponding private key credential that both makes the user a
resource in the system and provides them access to that system.

This serves a number of functions. For instance, an administrator can perform an
affiliation level search for a given student, faculty member, class, or program
(among many other things), either by ID or by attributes. A student can register
with another university within the affiliation to take a class remotely, or can
even sign up to and use remotely controlled laboratories stations (such as
observatory time at a telescope or participation within a collaborative
concert). A teacher can make available resources such as books or training
videos from protected repositories to all of her students.

In this particular case, the registry serves to identify those domains within
the network of nodes of affiliated members that may contain the desired
resources. When a query is made in the broader context of the affiliation, each
of these affiliated nodes are then queried in turn and return the associated
links to those resources as a structure (analogous to an RSS or Atom type
structure) that are then collated by the calling domain.

Note that the nodes in these affiliated networks are not (typically) graph
extensions. A graph extension expands the active domain graph of a given node
and is normally secured, because it exposes all resources within that graph. An
affiliation query, on the other hand, is a request for information (typically
links but also maps) from other nodes in the affiliated network.

[source,mermaid]
----
---
config:
  layout: elk
---
flowchart TD
  subgraph SWRAF[Spatial Web Affiliation]
      subgraph ULN[University Network]
         direction TB
            Oxbridge1[<b>Domain</b><br>Oxbridge University]
            Camford[<b>Domain</b><br>Camford University]
            Eden[<b>Domain</b><br>Eden University]
            Queens[<b>Domain</b><br>Queens College]
      end
      subgraph CL[College Rugby League]
         direction TB
         Oxbridge2[<b>Domain</b><br>Oxbridge University]
         Amhurter[<b>Domain</b><br>Anhurter]
         Chancery[<b>Domain</b><br>Chancery]
      end
      Oxbridge1 -.- Oxbridge2
      ulna[<b>Domain</b><br>University League Registry]
      cla[<b>Domain</b><br>College Rugby Registry]
      ulna -->ULN
      cla -->CL
  end
  swra[<b>Domain</b><br>Spatial Web Registry]
  swra -->SWRAF

  style SWRAF fill:#FFFFF8
----

Here, Oxbridge University is part of two affiliation networks - a university
network and a rugby league network.
